简 要 说 明

一、本篇资料的主要内容

本篇资料反映江苏省工业经济方面的基本情况，包括：

1.全省规模以上工业生产、效益主要指标增速，以及按企业登记注册类型、企业规模、工业行业大类和按地区分组的生产、效益主要指标增速；

2.全省规模以上工业企业主要经济指标，以及按企业登记注册类型、轻重工业、企业规模、工业行业大类和按地区分组的主要经济指标；

3.国有控股、私营、外商投资和港澳台投资工业企业按工业行业大类和按地区分组的主要经济指标；

4.大中型工业企业按工业行业大类和按地区分组的主要经济指标；

5.规模以上工业中高技术制造业主要经济指标；

6.主要工业产品产量。

二、本篇资料的统计范围

本篇资料中规模以上工业企业的统计范围：1998年至2006年为全部国有和年主营业务收入500万元及以上的非国有工业法人单位，2007年至2010年为年主营业务收入500万元及以上的工业法人单位，2011年至2020年为年主营业务收入2000万元及以上工业法人单位，2021年起为年主营业务收入2000万元及以上工业法人单位和个体经营户。本篇资料中工业行业分类按《国民经济行业分类》（GB/T 4754-2017）标准划分；企业规模划分按《统计上大中小微型企业划分办法（2017）》标准执行。

三、本篇的资料来源和统计调查方法

本篇工业企业统计数据主要根据工业统计报表有关资料整理汇总。

四、数据使用注意事项

2017年以来全国规模以上工业企业主要经济指标数据与上年数据之间存在不可比因素，其主要原因是：（一）根据统计制度，每年定期对规模以上工业企业调查范围进行调整。每年有部分企业达到规模标准纳入调查范围，也有部分企业因规模变小而退出调查范围，还有新建投产企业、破产、注（吊）销企业等变化。（二）加强统计执法，对统计执法检查中发现的不符合规模以上工业统计要求的企业进行了清理，对相关基数依规进行了修正。（三）加强数据质量管理，剔除跨地区、跨行业重复统计数据。

Brief Introduction

I. Main Contents

Data in this chapter reflect the basic conditions of the industrial sector in Jiangsu. It includes:

﻿1. Main growth rate of industrial production and efficiency indicators of industrial enterprises above designated size; as well as their main growth rate of economic indicators classified by type of registration, by size of enterprise, by industrial sector and by region.

2. Main economic indicators of industrial enterprises above designated size, as well as their main economic indicators, classified by type of registration, by light and heavy industries, by size of enterprise, by industrial sector and by region.

3. Main economic indicators and efficiency indicators of state-holding industrial enterprises, private industrial enterprises, foreign-funded industrial enterprises and industrial enterprises with funds from Hong Kong, Macao and Taiwan classified by industrial sector and by region.

4. Main economic indicators and efficiency indicators of large and medium-sized industrial enterprises classified by industrial sector and by region.

5. Main economic indicators and efficiency indicators of medium and high technology manufacturing above designated size classified by industrial sector and by region.

6. Output of key industrial products.

II. Scopes of Statistics

The scopes of industrial enterprises above designated size were: all state-owned industrial enterprises and non-state-owned industrial enterprises with revenue from principal business over 5 million yuan from 1998 to 2006. From 2007 to 2010, the scopes of industrial enterprises with revenue from principal business were over 5 million yuan. Since 2011, the scopes of all industrial enterprises with revenue from principal business were adjusted to above 20 million. Data by branch of industry in this chapter are based on the National Industrial Classification of all Economic Activities（GB/T 4754-2017）, and data by size of enterprise are based on the 2017's Standards of Enterprises by Size.

III. Sources of Data and Methods of Survey

The data on industrial enterprises in this chapter are compiled mainly based on the annual industrial statistics reporting forms.

IV. Data Usage Notes

Since 2017, data of main indicators of industrial enterprises above designated size nationwide are not comparable with previous years, the reasons are as following: (1) According to the statistic system, the investigation scope of industrial enterprises above designated size should be adjusted regularly every year. Every year, some enterprises meet the scale criteria to be included in the scope of investigation, some enterprises with draw from the scope of investigation because of the smaller scale, and there are other changes: new enterprises, bankruptcy, annotation（cancellation） enterprises, etc. (2) Strengthening of statistical law enforcement, cleaning up enterprises found in the inspection of statistical law enforcement that don't meet the standard of industrial statistics above designated size, and amending the relevant cardinality in accordance with regulations. (3) Strengthening data quality management and eliminating duplicated statistical data across regions and across industries.﻿﻿