主要统计指标解释

工业 指从事自然资源的开采，对采掘品和农产品进行加工和再加工的物质生产部门。具体包括：（1）对自然资源的开采，如采矿、晒盐、森林采伐等（但不包括禽兽捕猎和水产捕捞）；（2）对农副产品的加工、再加工，如粮油加工、食品加工、缫丝、纺织、制革等；（3）对采掘品的加工、再加工，如炼铁、炼钢、化工生产、石油加工、机器制造、木材加工等，以及电力、燃气及水的生产和供应等；（4）对工业品的修理、翻新，如机器设备的修理等。

轻工业 指主要提供生活消费品和制作手工工具的工业。按其所使用的原料不同，可分为两大类： （1）以农产品为原料的轻工业，是指直接或间接以农产品为基本原料的轻工业。主要包括食品制造、饮料制造、烟草加工、纺织、缝纫、皮革和毛皮制作、造纸以及印刷等工业；（2）以非农产品为原料的轻工业，是指以工业品为原料的轻工业。主要包括文教体育用品、化学药品制造、合成纤维制造、日用化学制品、日用玻璃制品、日用金属制品、手工工具制造、医疗器械制造、文化和办公用机械制造等工业。

重工业 是指为国民经济各部门提供物质技术基础的主要生产资料的工业。按其生产性质和产品用途，可以分为下列三类：（1）采掘（伐）工业，是指对自然资源的开采，包括石油开采、煤炭开采、金属矿开采、非金属矿开采和木材采伐等工业；（2）原材料工业，指向国民经济各部门提供基本材料、动力和燃料的工业。包括金属冶炼及加工、炼焦及焦炭、化学、化工原料、水泥、人造板以及电力、石油和煤炭加工等工业；（3）加工工业，是指对工业原材料进行再加工制造的工业。包括装备国民经济各部门的机械设备制造工业、金属结构、水泥制品等工业，以及为农业提供的生产资料如化肥、农药等工业。

根据上述划分原则，修理业中以重工业产品为修理作业对象的划为重工业，反之划为轻工业。

资产总计 指企业过去的交易或者事项形成的、由企业拥有或者控制的、预期会给企业带来经济利益的资源。包括企业拥有的土地、办公楼、厂房、机器、运输工具、存货等实物资产和现金、存款、应收账款和预付账款等金融资产。资产一般按流动性分为流动资产和非流动资产。其中流动资产可分为货币资金、交易性金融资产、应收票据、应收账款、预付款项、其他应收款、存货等；非流动资产可分为长期股权投资、固定资产、无形资产及其他非流动资产等。来源于会计“资产负债表”中“资产总计”项目的期末余额数。

流动资产合计 资产满足以下条件之一应归为流动资产：（1）预计在一个正常营业周期中变现、出售或耗用，主要包括存货、应收账款等；（2）主要为交易目的而持有；（3）预计在资产负债表日起一年内（含一年）变现；（4）自资产负债日起一年内，交换其他资产或清偿负债的能力不受限制的现金或现金等价物。包括货币资金、应收票据、应收账款、存货等项目。来源于会计“资产负债表”中“流动资产合计”项目的期末余额数。

负债合计指企业过去的交易或者事项形成的，预期会导致经济利益流出企业的现时义务。包括银行贷款、借款、应付账款、应付职工工资、应付职工福利费、应交税金等企业负有偿还责任的债务。负债一般按偿还期长短分为流动负债和非流动负债。来源于会计“资产负债表”中“负债合计”项目的期末余额数。

应收账款 指资产负债表日以摊余成本计量的、企业因销售商品、提供服务等经营活动应收取的款项。来源于会计“资产负债表”中“应收账款”项目的期末余额数。

存货 指企业在日常活动中持有以备出售的产成品或商品、处在生产过程中的在产品、在生产过程或提供劳务过程中耗用的材料或物料等，通常包括原材料、在产品、半成品、产成品、商品以及周转材料等。来源于会计“资产负债表”中“存货”项目的期末余额数。

产成品 指企业已经完成全部生产过程并验收入库，可以按照合同规定的条件送交订货单位，或者可以作为商品对外销售的产品。如果会计“资产负债表”列示“产成品”或“库存商品”项目，则为其期末余额；或者，根据会计“产成品”或“库存商品”科目的借方余额，减去为“产成品”或“库存商品”计提的存货跌价准备等计算得出。

营业收入 指企业从事销售商品、提供劳务和让渡资产使用权等生产经营活动形成的经济利益流入。营业收入包括“主营业务收入”和“其他业务收入”。来源于会计“利润表”中“营业收入”项目的本年累计数。

营业成本指企业从事销售商品、提供劳务和让渡资产使用权等生产经营活动发生的实际成本。包括企业（单位）在报告期内从事销售商品、提供劳务等日常活动发生的各种耗费。包括“主营业务成本”和“其他业务成本”。来源于会计“利润表”中“营业成本”项目的本年累计数。

销售费用 指企业在销售商品和材料、提供劳务的过程中发生的各种费用，包括保险费、包装费、展览费和广告费、商品维修费、预计产品质量保证损失、运输费、装卸费等以及为销售本企业商品而专设的销售机构（含销售网点、售后服务网点等）的职工薪酬、业务费、折旧费等经营费用。

管理费用 指企业为组织和管理企业生产经营所发生的费用，包括企业在筹建期间内发生的开办费、董事会和行政管理部门在企业经营管理中发生的，或者应当由企业统一负担的公司经费等。来源于会计“利润表”中“管理费用”项目的本年累计数。

财务费用 指企业为筹集生产经营所需资金等而发生的筹资费用，包括企业生产经营期间发生的利息支出（减利息收入）、汇兑损失（减汇兑收益）以及相关的手续费等。来源于会计“利润表”中“财务费用”项目的本年累计数。

利润总额 指企业在一定会计期间的经营成果，是生产经营过程中各种收入扣除各种耗费后的盈余，反映企业在报告期内实现的盈亏总额。来源于会计“利润表”中“利润总额”项目的本年累计数。

平均用工人数 指报告期企业平均实际拥有的、参与本企业生产经营活动的人员数。企业亏损面 指报告期末的亏损企业单位数占全部企业单位数的比重，用百分数表示。计算公式为：企业亏损面=亏损企业单位数/全部企业单位数×100%。

资产负债率 该指标既反映企业经营风险的大小，也反映企业利用债权人提供的资金从事经营活动的能力。计算公式为：资产负债率（%）=负债总额/资产总额×100%。资产与负债均为报告期期末数。

流动资产周转次数 指一定时期内流动资产完成的周转次数，反映投入工业企业流动资金的周转速度。计算公式为：流动资产周转资转=营业收入/流动资产平均余额。公式中全部流动资产平均余额为期初和期末的流动资产之和的算术平均值，年鉴指标“流动资产周转次数”计算时流动资产平均余额直接取流动资产报告期期末数。

成本费用利润率 反映企业投入的生产成本及费用的经济效益，同时也反映企业降低成本所取得的经济效益。计算公式为：成本费用利润（%）=利润总额/成本费用总额×100%。

总资产贡献率 反映企业全部资产的获利能力，是企业经营业绩和管理水平的集中体现，是评价和考核企业盈利能力的核心指标。计算公式为：总资产贡献率（%）=（利润总额+税金总额+利息支出）/平均资产总额×100%。公式中平均资产总额为期初期末资产之和的算术平均值，年鉴指标“总资产贡献率”计算时平均资产总额直接取资产报告期期末数。

Explanatory Notes on Main Statistical Indicators

Industry refers to the material production sector which is engaged in extraction of natural resources and processing and reprocessing of minerals and agricultural products, including(1)extraction of natural resources, such as mining, salt production, deforestation and so on(but not including hunting and fishing);(2)processing and reprocessing of farm and sideline produces, such as grain and oil processing, food processing, silk reeling, spinning and weaving, and leather making;(3)processing and reprocessing of mineral products, such as steel making, iron smelting, chemicals manufacturing, petroleum processing, machine building, timber processing, and production and supply of electricity, gas and water;(4)repairing and renovating of industrial products such as the machinery.

Light Industryrefers to the industry that produces consumer goods and hand tools.It consists of two categories according to the raw materials used:(1)Light industries using farm products as raw materials.These are branches of light industry which directly or indirectly use farm products as basic raw materials, including the manufacture of foods and beverages, tobacco processing, textile, clothing, leather and fur manufacturing, paper making, printing, etc.(2)Light industries using non-farm products as raw materials.These are branches of light industry which use manufactured goods as raw materials, including the manufacture of cultural, stationery and sporting goods, chemicals, synthetic fibre, chemical products for daily use, glass products for daily use, metal products for daily use, hand tools, medical apparatus and instruments, and the manufacture of cultural and machinery for office use.

Heavy Industry refers to the industry which produces capital goods, and provides various sectors of the national economy with necessary material and technical basis.It consists of the following three branches according to the purpose of production or the usage of products:(1)Extractive industry refers to the industry that extracts natural resources, including extraction of petroleum, coal, metal and non-metal ores and logging.(2)Raw materials industry refers to the industry that provides various sectors of the national economy with raw materials, fuels and power.It includes smelting and processing of metals, coking and carbon coke, chemistry, chemical materials and building materials such as cement, artificial board, power, petroleum refining and coal dressing.(3)Processing industry refers to the industry that processes raw materials.It includes machinery manufacturing industry which equips sectors of the national economy, industries of metal structure and cement products, industries producing means of agricultural production, such as chemical fertilizers and pesticides.

According to the above principle of classification, the repairing trades which are engaged primarily in repairing products of heavy industry are classified into heavy industry while these engaged in repairing products of light industry are classified into light industry.

Total Assets refer to all resources, owned or controlled by enterprises, that could bring prospective economic benefits by past trades and items, including land owned by enterprises, office buildings, factory buildings, machines, transportation, physical assets such as stocks, financial assets such as cash, deposit, receivables and prepayment. Assets can be classified into current assets and non-current assets through mobility.

Current Assets refer to the assets that meet one of the following requirements: (1) expected to be cashed, sold or used in a normal operation cycle, mainly including inventory and accounts receivable; (2) owned for transaction purpose mainly; (3) expected to be cashed within one year(including one year) from the day of the Balance Sheet; (4) unlimited cash or cash equivalents that can be exchanged with other assets or capable of settling debts during one year since the day of the Balance Sheet. Included are monetary capital, notes receivable, accounts receivable and inventories. Data on this indicator can be obtained from the year-end figures of total current assets in the balance sheet of accounting records.

Total Liabilities refer to the current obligations that could result in prospective outflow of economic benefits by past trades and items. They include bank loans, accounts of payable, staff salaries of payable, staff welfare expenses of payable, taxes payable and liabilities which should be paid back by enterprises. Classified by terms of repayment, liabilities include liquid liabilities and long-term liabilities. Data on this indictor can be obtained from the year-end figures of total liabilities in the Balance Sheet of accounting records.

Accounts Receivable refers to creditor's rights through business activities such as selling goods and providing services. It comes from the ending balance of accounts receivable in balance sheet.

Inventoriesrefers to finished goods or commodities held in preparation for sale in enterprises' daily activities, goods in the production process, material or the physical materials consumed in the production process or in the process of providing services, usually include raw materials, goods in the production process, semi-finished products, finished products, goods and materials in flow. It comes from the ending balance of inventory in balance sheet.

Finished Goods refers to the products that the enterprises have completed all of the production process and accepted and put in storage, and can be sent to the ordering units in accordance with the contract stipulations, or canbe on sale. If “finished goods” or “goods in stock” are listed in the Balance Sheet, it is the ending balance; or, it is calculated according to the debit balance of the accounting “finished goods” or “goods in stock” account, minus the inventory falling price reserves for “finished products” or “goods in stock”.

﻿﻿Business Revenue refers to the inflow of economic benefits through production and operation activities of enterprises, such as selling commodities, providing labor services and transferring the right to use of assets. Business revenue includes “revenue from principal business” and “revenue from other business”. It comes from current year's cumulative report of “business revenue” items from the “income statement”.

Business Cost refers to the actual costs incurred by the enterprises in such production and operation activities as selling commodities, providing labor services and transferring the right to use of assets. It includes various expenditures incurred by enterprises(units) in their daily activities of selling goods and providing labour services during the reporting period. It includes “cost of principal business” and “cost of other business”. It comes from current year's cumulative report of “operating cost” items from the “income statement”.

Selling Expenses refer to the cost during the sale of goods and materials, providing labour services, including insurance, packing, exhibition fees and advertising fees, merchandise maintenance costs, expected product quality guarantee loss, transportation fees, handling fees, and operating expenses for the sales of the company's products, such as employee compensation, business expenses, depreciation costs for dedicated sales offices(including sales outlets, after-sales service outlets, etc.).

Management Expenses refer to the expenses for the organization and management of enterprise operation, including the start-up costs during the construction of enterprises, funds occurred during enterprises operation by board of directors and executive management in the enterprise management, and other costs to be paid by enterprises. It comes from current year's cumulative amount of management cost in income statement.

Financial Expenses refer to cost of fund-raising for enterprises to raise funds for production and operation, including interest payments(a reduction in interest income), exchange loss(less exchange gains) and related fees during the period of production. It comes from current year's cumulative amount of financial expenses in income statement.

Total Profits refer to the operational results in a certain accounting period, and it is the balance of various incomes minus various spendings in the course of operation, reflecting the total profits and losses of enterprises in reference period. Data are obtained from current year's cumulative amount of total profits in the profit statement of the accounting record of enterprise.

Annual Average Employees refer to the number of persons engaged in the production and operation activities of enterprises in the reporting period, which are actually employed by the enterprises.

Percentage of Business Suffering Loss refers to the proportion of the number of loss-making enterprise units in the total number of enterprise units at the end of the reporting period, expressed in percentages. The formula for computation is: Percentage of Business Suffering Loss=Number of Loss-making Enterprise Units/Total Number of Enterprise Units×100%.

Assets Liability Ratio This indicator reflects both the size of the business risk and the ability of the enterprise to use the funds provided by creditors to engage in business activities. The formula for computation is: Assets Liability Ratio(%)=Total Liabilities/Total Assets×100% Assets and liabilities are data at the end of the reporting period.

Times of Turnover of Current Assets refers to the times of turnover of current assets completed in a certain period of time, reflecting the turnover speed of the working capital invested in industrial enterprises. The formula for computation is: Times of Turnover of Current Assets= Business Revenue/Average Balance of Current Assets. The average balance of all current assets in the formula is the arithmetic average of the sum of the current assets at the beginning and end of the period. When calculates “Times of turnover of current assets” in the yearbook, the average balance of current assets is directly taken from the end of the current assets reporting period.

Ratio of Profits to Cost Expense It reflects the economic benefits of the production costs and expenses invested by the enterprises, and also reflects the economic benefits achieved by the enterprise in reducing costs. The formula for computation is: Ratio of Profits of Cost Expense(%)=Total Profits/Total Cost Expenses×100%

Contribution Ratio of Total Assets It reflects the profitability of all assets of the enterprise. It is the concentrated embodiment of the business performance and management level of the enterprise and is the core indicator for evaluating and assessing the profitability of the enterprise. The formula for computation is: Contribution Ratio of Total Assets=(Total Profits+Total Tax+Interest Expenses)/Average Total Assets×100% The average total assets in the formula is the arithmetic average of the sum of the assets at the beginning and end of the period. When calculates “Contribution ratio of total assets” in the yearbook, the average total assets is directly taken from the assets reporting period.